docs: Overhaul Explore Profiles documentation (#63)
grafana/explore-profiles: docs/sources/access/index.md

---
description: Access or install Explore Profiles.
_build:
  list: false

> noindex: true

Author: We need instructions for how to install or access Explore Profiles. 

This page doesn't appear in the build. It's here as a placeholder until we write the content.

Author: Done.

---
description: Access or install Explore Profiles.
keywords:
  - Install
  - Configure
  - Explore Profiles
title: Access or install Explore Profiles
menuTitle: Access or install
weight: 150
---

# Access or install Explore Profiles

Explore Profiles is a native Grafana application designed to integrate seamlessly with [Pyroscope](https://github.com/grafana/pyroscope), the open-source continuous profiling platform, providing a smooth, query-less experience for browsing and analyzing profiling data.

You can use Explore Profiles in Grafana Cloud or with Grafana open source stand-alone.

## Before you begin

To use Explore Profiles with Grafana Cloud, you need:

* A Grafana Cloud account

> * A Grafana stack in Grafana Cloud with a configured Hosted profiles or Pyroscope data source

Reviewer: I'm not sure if the "Hosted" needs to be in caps here.

Author: You can use either the Hosted profiles data source or the Pyroscope data source. I capitalized it to match the Grafana UI. Do you find it confusing?  
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7dc1b18d-f8f3-4e1c-9a94-25c9051d4b0c)

Author: For example: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0d98f13f-2016-4e44-8073-017028c33961)

Reviewer: Only because I'm not looking at the UI. I think that if it's a known data source, it shouldn't be confusing for users.

To use Explore Profiles with Grafana open source, you need:

* Your own Grafana instance
* The [Explore Profiles plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-pyroscope-app/)

## Install Explore Profiles

Explore Profiles is distributed as a Grafana Plugin. You can find it in the official [Grafana Plugin Directory](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-pyroscope-app/).

### Install in [Grafana Cloud](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/)

> All Grafana Cloud instances come with Explore Profiles plugin preinstalled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Grafana Cloud instances come with the Explore Profiles plugin preinstalled.
```

### Installation in your Grafana instance

You can install Explore Profiles in your own Grafana instance using `grafana-cli`:

```shell
grafana-cli plugins install grafana-pyroscope-app
```

> Alternatively, you can do it via Grafana UI by following these steps:

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can install Explore Profiles within Grafana by following these steps:
```

> Alternatively, you can install Explore Profiles within Grafana by following these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, follow these steps to install Explore Profiles in Grafana:
```

> 1. Within Grafana, go to Administration > Plugins and data > Plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In Grafana, go to Administration > Plugins and data > Plugins.
```

Reviewer: Are these UI elements? Do they need to be bolded?

Author: yes. Good catch. I'll update your suggestion to bold them.

2. Search for "Explore Profiles".

> 3. Click on Explore Profiles.

Reviewer: Same, is this a UI element?

Author: It's a plugin name, so not the Explore Profiles in the UI. Maybe saying Select would be better than Click? 
```suggestion
3. Select Explore Profiles.
```

> 2. Search for "Explore Profiles".
> 3. Click on "Explore Profiles".
> 4. Click on "Install" button.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Search for "Explore Profiles".
3. Click on Explore Profiles.
4. Click **Install**
```

---
description: Access or install Explore Profiles.
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/explore/simplified-exploration/profiles/access/
keywords:
  - Install
  - Configure
  - Explore Profiles
title: Access or install Explore Profiles
menuTitle: Access or install
weight: 150
refs:
  pyroscope-data-source:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/datasources/pyroscope/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/data-sources/pyroscope/
---

# Access or install Explore Profiles

> Explore Profiles is a native Grafana application designed to integrate seamlessly with [Pyroscope](https://github.com/grafana/pyroscope), the open source continuous profiling platform, providing a smooth, query-less experience for browsing and analyzing profiling data.

Reviewer 2: Not too sure i like query-less, we still do queries, the user just doesn't use a query language.

```suggestion
Explore Profiles is a native Grafana application designed to integrate seamlessly with [Pyroscope](https://github.com/grafana/pyroscope), the open source continuous profiling platform, providing a smooth, query-language-less experience for browsing and analyzing profiling data.
```

Reviewer 3: I believe there is ongoing discussion about the use of the word "queryless" but the spelling we've adopted until that's resolved is without a hyphen: https://github.com/grafana/writers-toolkit/blob/main/vale/dictionary.jsonnet#L167

Author: Christian, Your suggestion is more technically accurate. We're having the same type of conversation with the other apps as well. The Traces app uses queries underneath. Users can't see the TraceQL behind it.  

```suggestion
Explore Profiles is a native Grafana application designed to integrate seamlessly with [Pyroscope](https://github.com/grafana/pyroscope), the open source continuous profiling platform, providing a smooth, queryless experience for browsing and analyzing profiling data.
```

You can use Explore Profiles in Grafana Cloud or with Grafana open source stand-alone.

## Before you begin

To use Explore Profiles with Grafana Cloud, you need:

* A Grafana Cloud account
* A Grafana stack in Grafana Cloud with a configured Hosted profiles or [Pyroscope data source](ref:pyroscope-data-source)

To use Explore Profiles with Grafana open source, you need:

* Your own Grafana instance
* A configured [Pyroscope data source](ref:pyroscope-data-source)
* The [Explore Profiles plugin](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-pyroscope-app/)

## Install the Explore Profiles plugin

Explore Profiles is distributed as a Grafana Plugin. You can find it in the official [Grafana Plugin Directory](https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/grafana-pyroscope-app/).

> ### Install in [Grafana Cloud](https://grafana.com/products/cloud/)
> 
> All Grafana Cloud instances come with the Explore Profiles plugin preinstalled.

Author: ```suggestion
{{< admonition type="note" >}}
All Grafana Cloud instances come with the Explore Profiles plugin preinstalled.
{{< /admonition >}}
```

### Install in your Grafana instance

You can install Explore Profiles in your own Grafana instance using `grafana-cli`:

```shell
grafana-cli plugins install grafana-pyroscope-app
```

Alternatively, follow these steps to install Explore Profiles in Grafana:

1. In Grafana, go to **Administration** > **Plugins and data** > **Plugins**.
2. Search for "Explore Profiles".
3. Select Explore Profiles.
4. Click **Install**

> 

Author: ```suggestion

The plugin is automatically activated after installation. 
```

### Install using environment variables

If you want to install the app in a Docker container, you need to configure the following environment variable:

```shell
GF_INSTALL_PLUGINS=grafana-pyroscope-app

> ```

Reviewer 2: I do think you need to also enable the plugin in a second step. I don't know why this is required. When I install for Example "Explore Logs" it is there right away.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/24d1c6cf-a9de-4ca4-8ee2-eb029c9569e5)

I actually can't find where to do this, the enable seems to be missing for us too.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8e1c6ce3-2568-4344-be5f-e7264bc456d9)

cc @grafakus

Reviewer 2: Ok this PR should enable the auto install https://github.com/grafana/explore-profiles/pull/65

Author: Just to verify: With your PR merged, a user can install thel plugin and it's automatically enabled? Or do we need to add a step to Enable?

Reviewer 2: @knylander-grafana Ideally the PR in #65 will fix it so we do not require changes to the docs, but @petethepig will verify that.

Author: I'm out tomorrow, but if things look good, please give an approval and feel free to merge the docs.
